Brant Bjork to Release New Album this Fall

Don’t get me wrong, it’s very cool that Brant Bjork and the Low Desert Punk are going to Europe to tour and playing Up in Smoke and Desertfest Belgium and so on, and it’s very cool that they’re going out starting next week on the West Coast with Bl’ast, C.O.C. and Lord Dying, but we already knew that stuff — even if I hadn’t seen a complete list of the Euro dates as yet — and what’s even better this time around is that the next Brant Bjork album has been slated for a Fall release through Napalm. I’d been trying not to get my hopes up too much.

And along comes the PR wire with reason to do precisely that. You may recall last week some live video of the new song “Requiem” went up. Below the news, you’ll find another quality clip of a track called “We Don’t Serve Their Kind” from the recent Australian tour that’s worth checking out:



BRANT BJORK and The Low Desert Punk Band to Hit the Road With COC and B’last
Solo Album Set For Release This Fall on Napalm Records

BRANT BJORK and The Low Desert Punk Band will be hitting the road later this month alongside COC and B’LAST. The dates begin August 21st in Salt Lake Utah and are set to run through September 1st in Vancouver, BC. A European tour is scheduled for October. All dates can be found below.

It was recently announced that BRANT BJORK signed with Napalm Records and is currently working on a new album due out this fall. BB will be playing songs from the upcoming record and some “Low Desert Punk” classics.

BRANT BJORK commented on the tour:

“I am super stoked and honored to be part of this legendary line up with COC and B’last! Not only will we be rocking but it is always great to tour with friends.”

Known for his work as a founding member of Kyuss and more recently for his work with John Garcia in VISTA CHINO, BRANT BJORK has had quite an eventful career as a founder of record labels (El Camino and Duna Records) and world-renowned producer. In addition to founding the record labels, playing, touring and recording, BRANT also works as a producer and has worked with many amazing artists throughout the years including teaming up with LAB (featuring ex Bl’ast members), Fatso Jetson, Fu Manchu and re-uniting with Nick Oliveri in Mondo Generator.

More info regarding the new album coming this fall on Napalm Records will be revealed soon.