Breaking: Robin Williams Has Died at the Age of 63

Robin Williams has died today at the age of 63. According to The Hollywood Reporter, the actor was found today in his Tiburon, California home, appearing to have taken his own life.

The official police statement reads as follows:

"On August 11, 2014, at approximately 11:55 a.m, Marin County Communications received a 9-1-1 telephone call reporting a male adult had been located unconscious and not breathing inside his residence in unincorporated Tiburon, CA. The Sheriff痴 Office, as well as the Tiburon Fire Department and Southern Marin Fire Protection District were dispatched to the incident with emergency personnel arriving on scene at 12:00 pm. The male subject, pronounced deceased at 12:02 pm has been identified as Robin McLaurin Williams, a 63-year-old resident of unincorporated Tiburon, CA.

An investigation into the cause, manner, and circumstances of the death is currently underway by the Investigations and Coroner Division s of the Sheriff痴 Office. Preliminary information developed during the investigation indicates Mr. Williams was last seen alive at his residence, where he resides with his wife, at approximately 10:00 pm on August 10, 2014. Mr. Williams was located this morning shortly before the 9-1-1 call was placed to Marin County Communications. At this time, the Sheriff痴 Office Coroner Division suspects the death to be a suicide due to asphyxia, but a comprehensive investigation must be completed before a final determination is made. A forensic examination is currently scheduled for August 12, 2014 with subsequent toxicology testing to be conducted."

Williams' publicist, Mara Buxbaum, said: "Robin Williams passed away this morning. He has been battling severe depression of late. This is a tragic and sudden loss. The family respectfully asks for their privacy as they grieve during this very difficult time."

His wife, Susan Schneider, said: "This morning, I lost my husband and my best friend, while the world lost one of its most beloved artists and beautiful human beings. I am utterly heartbroken. On behalf of Robin's family, we are asking for privacy during our time of profound grief. As he is remembered, it is our hope the focus will not be on Robin's death, but on the countless moments of joy and laughter he gave to millions."

Williams made a name for himself starring in the hit ABC series, "Mork & Mindy." Williams played Mork, an alien from the planet Ork, opposite Pam Dawber's Mindy. From there, Williams continued to build a name for himself as both a stand up comedian and an actor, winning an Academy Award for his work in Gus Van Sant's Good Will Hunting. He was nominated for three more Academy Awards and was also a two-time Emmy, five-time Golden Globe and six-time Grammy winner, but his incredible list of credits speaks for itself.

Williams recently starred in the CBS comedy series "The Crazy Ones," which was cancelled after one season, and will next appear in Night at the Museum: Secret of the Tomb in December.

20th Century Fox, the distributor of the "Night at the Museum" films, released the following statement: "There are no words to describe the loss of Robin Williams. Our hearts go out to his family, friends and fans. He will be deeply missed."

From Popeye to The World According to Garp to Good Morning Vietnam to Aladdin to Jumanji and Mrs. Doubtfire, everyone has their favorite Williams role. What was yours? Share your favorite Robin Williams memories in the comments below as we mourn the loss of a true Hollywood talent.

(Photo Credit: Getty Images)